**POLITICAL SCIENCE AND
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS**
Paper‑I
Political Theory
Section‑A


Approaches to the study of political theory: Historical, normative and empirical.


Theories of state: Liberal, Marxist, Post‑colonial.


State Sovereignty: Monistic and Pluralistic theories; globalisation and the State.


Democracy: Democratic theory‑classical and contemporary


Human Rights: Theories of Human Rights; Theories of Justice, Equality and Revolution, Political obligation.


Theories of Political Culture and Political Economy.


Political Ideologies: Nature of ideology; Liberalism, Socialism, Marxism, Fascism and Gandhism.


Theories of Power and Hegemony: Pareto, Mosca, Michels, C. Wright Mills, Weber and Gramsci.


Indian Political Thought: Manu, Kautilya, M.N. Roy, Gandhi and Ambedkar.


Western Political Thought: Plato, Aristotle, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, J. S. Mill, Hegel and Marx, Lenin, and Mao Zedong.



Section‑B
Indian Government and Politics


Indian Nationalism: Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Dadabhai Naoroji, Tilak, Gandhi, Nehru, Subhas Bose and Ambedkar.


Indian freedom struggle: Constitutionalism, Revolutionary movements, Non Cooperation, Civil Disobedience and Quit India, Role of women in freedom struggle.


Constitutional Development in the pre‑Independence Era: Morley‑Minto Reforms; Montagu‑Chelmsford Reforms; Government of India Act, 1919 and 1935; and Cripps Mission.


Socio‑economic dimensions of the nationalist movement: The communal question and the demand for partition; backward caste movements; Trade union and Peasant movements; Civil rights movement.


Salient Features of the Indian Constitution: The Preamble, Fundamental Rights and Duties, Directive Principles; federalism, parliamentary system; amending procedures; judicial review.


The Executive System: President, Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers; Governor, Chief Minister and the State Council of Ministers. The Bureaucracy.


Parliament: Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha and Parliamentary Committees.


Judiciary: The Supreme Court and the High Courts; Judicial Activism.


Statutory institutions/commissions‑UPSC, Election Commission, Comptroller and Auditor General, Backward Classes Commission, National Commission for women, National Human Rights Commission; Minorities Commission.


Party System: Ideology and social base of parties; fragmentation and regionalization; patterns of coalition politics; trends in electoral behaviour; pressure groups.


Class, caste, backward class and Dalit movements; Tribal people’s movements; gender in Indian politics and women’s movements; ethnicity; communalism, and politics of regionalism.


Planning and Socio‑Economic Development: Role of the Planning Commission; Socio‑political dimensions of economic reforms.


Local Governance: Panchayati Raj and municipal government; significance of 73rd and 74th Amendments; Women’s empowerment.


State Politics in Odisha: Social bases of Odia Nationalism; Freedom Movement and Praja Mandal Movements in Odisha; Integration of Princely States in Odisha; Coalition Politics, People’s Movement and Women’s Movement.



Paper – II
International Politics
Section‑A
International Politics


International System: Evolution; The Modern State and Sovereign State System.


Concepts of international politics: Power, balance of power, national interest, collective security.


Theories of International politics: Idealist, Realist, Systems, Decision‑making and Game Theory.


Determinants of foreign policy: Ideology, Domestic compulsions, geopolitics, and global order.


Origin and decline of Cold War; New World Order.


Major issues of world politics: Cuban Missile Crisis; Vietnam War, Oil Crisis, Collapse of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavian Crisis; Afghan Crisis, Iraq War.


Non‑alignment: Nonaligned Movements; Its relevance in the post cold war era.


Disarmament and Arms Control;


The evolution of the international economic order‑from Bretton woods to WTO, the North‑South dimension.


UN and its specialized agencies


Regional organizations: ASEAN, EU, SAARC


Global Concerns: Human Rights, Ecology, Gender Justice



Section‑B
India and the World


Indian Foreign Policy : Historical origins, determinants; the institutions of policymaking; continuity and change.


The Non‑Alignment Movement: India’s Contribution to NAM; its contemporary relevance.


India and the major powers: USA, EU, China, and Russia.


India and its neighbours: Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Nepal.


Conflict and co‑operation in South and South East Asia: Kashmir, SAARC, ASEAN.


India’s Nuclear Policy: PNE, NPT, CTBT.


India and the UN System: India’s role in UN Peace Keeping and global disarmament.


India and the international economic order; WTO, IMF, IBRD, Globalization
